













Part one INTRODUCTION
The bioprocess study makes evident the principles that are the foundation of living systems. In the 
first part of this chapter, different kind ofbioprocesses (specially the aerobic bioprocesses) will 
be analyzed, together with the most interesting parameters and a general overview on the cell 
metabolism. In the second part, the most usual bioreactor types with some particularities will be 
shown. Finally, a general overview on the bioprocess measuring systems will be presented in 
addition with the information  organization  modalities and other some consonant possibilities on 
these.





















1




1. 1. B I OP ROC E S S E S



Bioprocesses are complex transformations of organic/anorganic  chemical  substances (substrates), 
introduced in the culture medium, into products of economic interest (Moser, 1985).

These transformations (conversions) represent an ensemble of biochemical (metabolic) reactions 
performed by living cells. The cells execute these conversions in order to acquire some metabolic 
products (substances which are necessary for the cellular components synthesis) or to obtain the 
growth or maintenance energy. At the same time, the cells  are  directed  towards  specific 
transformations of substrates into useful products by means of appropriate procedures (Leveau, 
Bouix, 1984).











Fig. 1.1.1 Bioprocess conception

The substrates are transformed either in new structure components (cell growth system) or/and     
useful     substances (biotransformation/biosynthesis    cycle) (Nagai, 1979).

The main product of some bioprocesses is the growing cell quantity, but in most cases the formation 
 of some  metabolic  products (intracellular/extracellular) is  taken  into consideration.

The main bioprocess types are: 2
•  Aerobic bioprocesses (i.e. the oxygen can be considered as a second substrate);
•  Anaerobic bioprocesses.

In this work, only the aerobic bioprocesses, more complex transformations than the anaerobic ones, 
will be considered.

The cell's metabolism (i.e. the bioprocess) implies  the  transformations  through biochemical 
specific reactions of initial medium components in a main product and more secondary products 
(Leveau, Bouix, 1984, Kingsburg, 1989).

Bioprocesses take place into a culture medium, an aqueous solution, where the substrates are solved 
or mixed ready for being transformed by the cells, also introduced in this mixture through 
inoculation.

From a physical point of view, the culture medium consists of the following phases (Moo Young, 
1985):
•  Solid phase: cells and insoluble medium components;
•  Liquid  phase:  water  with  soluble substrates or products;
•  Gas phase: air (oxygen, nitrogen), carbon dioxide and other metabolic gases.

Due to  the  cell  elementary  chemical composition (Moo Young, 1985), the culture medium must 
include all substances needed for cell growth and maintenance (Bocker, Recknagel,  1983). 
Therefore,  the main medium   components   are   either organic/inorganic products or/and complex 
natural compounds (Aiba et al., 1973):
•  Carbon & energy source: glucose, zaharose, molasses, cellulose, n-paraffin;
•  Nitrogen source;
•  Phosphorus source,
•  Oxygen source (for aerobic bioprocesses): air, air enriched with oxygen, etc.

PART
ONE

•  Metals  source  (as  microelements):
inorganic salts in very-small quantities.

The bioprocess can be considered as a biosystem, which involve cells-medium- bioprocess 
installation (this last part is usually a reactor) and is characterized by outstanding complexity 
and interdependencies (Moser, 1985).

For obtaining a high productivity in a bioprocess, an optimal evolution of the physic and 
biochemical parameters, which assure the cultivation conditions, is needed (Atkinson, Mavituna, 
1985, Kompen, Sodelberg, 1985). in agreement with cell growth and other metabolic requirements.

The main cultivation parameters are (Brauer, 1985, Schugerl, 1985, Blenke, 1985, Schugerl,
Sittig, 1987):
•  constant temperature (T) during the bioprocess evolution, specific for the cultivated cell: 
usual domain 20°C - 40°C;
•  pressure (p): domain 0 — 0.5 at.;
•  stirrer speed (n) (only for stirred reactors) and aeration (Q);
•  pH: domain 3 — 10;
•  dissolved oxygen (pO2);
•  redox potential (rH);
•  minim foam level.

The bioprocess evolution is always described by  the following  specific  biochemical parameters 
(Charles, 1985):
•  Substrate concentration (S);
•  Cell concentration/biomass (X);
•  Product concentration (P).

There are many distinct (on-line/off-line) methods  to  determine  the  above concentrations 
(Kossen, 1994, Moser, 1985,
Aiba, 1973, Moo-Young, 1985, Schugerl, 1985). Depending on specific cultivation circumstances, a 
particular method can be used, preferably for the automatic controls ability an on-line variant. 
Unfortunately, if for S and X concentrations there are some on-line
INTRODUCTION

monitoring  methods,  for  the  product concentration the off-line methods are usual.

A good bioprocess start-up involves the medium sterility. Many sterilization methods are presented 
in the scientific literature (Winkler,  1983,  Aiba, 1973)  and are performed through thermal or 
chemical effects or using radiation.

From a technological point of view (Chisti, 1989, Tolbert et al. 1982) there are three main 
bioprocess modes of operation:
•  Batch cultivation (..);
•  Fed-batch cultivation (..);
•  Continuous cultivation (Bliem, Katinger, 1988), Prokop, Rosenberg, 1989):

The standard evolution curve of a batch culture is shown in fig. 1.1.2. The intermediate phases are 
characteristic to each process with living cells (Moser, 1985, Kargi, 1985):









Fig. 1.1.2 Standard representation of batch culture
a) Lag phase or the cell adaptation to the new medium conditions;
b) Exponential growth phase
c) Stationary (steady state) phase;
d) Decreasing phase.

In addition, there are some cases (depending on the final product kinetics), where conjugate 
metabolic  routes (conforming  to well- controlled sequencing) can be applied, or simultaneous 
cultivation of two or more microorganisms is to be used (Schugerl, 1985)



3





There are some complex phenomena, specific to living systems, which define important concepts for 
the bioprocess control:
•  Inhibitory substrate concentration effect (Kobayashi, 1972): each cell can use the substrate  
until  a  certain  level  of concentration  and  for  concentrations superior to this value the 
metabolic reactions are inhibited and finally blocked. Due to its low solubility, there is no


1. 2. BI O R E A C T O RS

1.2.1. Overview

The specific problems of aerobic bioprocesses are correlated with the bioreactor conception 
(Chisti, 1989). Bioreactors are vessels in which  raw  materials  are  biologically converted  into 
 specific  products,  using microorganisms, plant or animal cells or individual enzymes. 
Microorganisms and cells are regularly involved in trying to maintain their  environment  to  
provide  optimum growing conditions. Bioreactors support this natural  process  by  supplying  
suitable conditions such as optimum temperature, pH, sufficient substrate, nutritional salts, 
vitamins and oxygen (for aerobic microorganisms), enabling cells to grow and form metabolites 
(Schugerl, 1991). It is generally known that the reactor performance (hydrodynamics and mass/energy 
 transfer  characteristics)  is depending on the configuration, the internal geometry and the 
liquid medium proprieties. The reactor performance is to be established in agreement with the 
cell's growth/maintenance and product formation requirements (Chisti, 1989).

Microbial processes are either aerobic or anaerobic and each type demands a different set of 
conditions. Aerobic reactors can be subdivided into submerged and surface reactors.  Submerged  
reactors  are more suitable than surface devices for mass production and have therefore become more
4
inhibition  by  dissolved  oxygen concentration
•  Growth associated/non-associated product kinetics (Gaden, 1959, Chisti, 1989): the growth 
associated product is mostly obtained during the exponential phase of growth, where the cell 
multiplication is maxim, but the non-growth-associated product  is  accumulated  after  this 
characteristic phase.




popular over the last few decades. In a high- performance submerged reactor turbulence must be 
created to ensure high specific production rates. This turbulence is generated by energy 
dissipation.

In high performance submerged reactors, high specific productivity in respect to the volume of the 
medium is attained only with highly specific power inputs. As this energy is dissipated, it 
releases heat which must be removed from the system Submerged reactors must be sterilizable and 
well equipped with devices for removing heat, instruments and control units, making them more 
expensive to produce and operate than the surface reactors.

In the aerobic bioprocesses, the oxygen is the least soluble nutrient from the medium and can 
become a limiting substrate for cellular growth (Bailey, Ollis, 1977). Hence, the reactors must 
assure the oxygen transfer rate required by the cells  metabolic  reactions.  Moreover,  the 
reactor must provide the heat transfer too, taking into consideration the endo-thermic / exothermic 
phases (Moser, 1985).
Furthermore, other condition imposed to bioreactor refers to sterility maintenance, especially for 
long continuous cultivation (Schugerl, 1985).

The main global concept about the bioreactor performance is this installation must be optimally 
designed and operated so that the





cultivated cells can find all the needed environmental  conditions.  Hence  the optimized 
bioreactor design is achieved based on bioprocess specificity (Charles, 1985).

Taking into consideration the geometric variants,  the  study  of  the  bioreactor hydrodynamic 
model and mass transfer capabilities in accordance with the bioprocess specificity  is  the  first  
level  for  the technological research in this field. After chousing the optimal variant (geometry 
and variation domain for the operation variables) not less important for an industrial reactor is 
the scaling up study of model bioreactors. Often the scaling down techniques must also be applied 
for achieving an optimal reactor design and operation. At the same time an adequate control 
strategy for the whole biosystem is to be parallel developed.

1.2.2. Bioreactors types

There are a number of ways in which turbulence can be produced by energy dissipation. From this 
point if view two principal bioreactor types are now used in the bioprocessing operation 
(Moo-Young, 1985):
•  Stirrer reactor;
•  Pneumatic reactor.

In the stirrer reactor energy is generated by the rotational or axial motion of mechanically moving 
 agitators,  kinetic  energy  being transferred to the liquid and then dissipated in it. Though the 
most used until now there are important reasons for developing other reactor types, the following 
ideas being of increase importance (Schugerl, 1991):
1. Construction of very large reactors (in this case the stirrer reactor requires high power level, 
high power and cooling water costs, introduces problems with heat removal).
2. Reduction in specific investment costs and in specific energy costs.
3. Reduction in substrate loss.
4. Increase in substrate conversion.
For all these reasons the use of airlift reactors, in which the energy is obtained from expansion 
of the compressed air, is now in progress.

For plant and animal cells cultivation other specific reactor types can be applied.

a) Stirrer reactor

For the time being the stirrer bioreactors are the most used fermentors in the bioindustry (Brauer, 
1985). They can assure optimal conditions  for  both  discontinuous  and continuous bioprocesses 
(Schugerl, 1985) whether special problems due to shear forces don't occur.

The stirrer reactors are characterized by remarkable flexibility, so that the same geometry can be 
used with minim adaptations for different aerobic bioprocesses, only by adequately chousing the 
operating parameters levels.

Mechanically stirred reactor consists of a cylindrical container with a height/diameter ratio of 
about 1-3 or more. They are often fitted with baffles to prevent vortexing on the medium. 
Generally, four baffles with the diameter of 0.1 from the vessel diameter are arranged 
symmetrically to the shaft with a minimum wall clearance of 0.02 from the vessel diameter. Heat is 
either added or removed by a jacket or helical coil. Mixing and gas dispersion are achieved by the 
stirrer positioned along the cylindrical axis of the container.
The main part of this reactor type is the stirrer, which must accomplish the following tasks 
(Brauer, 1985):
•  The energy transfer to the liquid;
•  The dispersion of gas into the liquid;
•  The oxygen transfer from the gaseous phase to the liquid phase;
•  The  mixing  of  all  the  medium components.





Function of different specific bioprocesses, many types of stirrers can be chosen taking into 
consideration the needs imposed by the cultivation, but in accordance with the criterion of a minim 
energy use, too.

The sterilized air is introduced into the bioreactor through the air sparger, usually a perforated 
ring, conveniently placed under the stirrer (well-defined diameters ratio and distance between 
them).

The mixing efficiency means a turbulent liquid flow, characterized by high level of the Reynolds 
number (NR>10³). At the same time the oxygen transfer  rate (OTR),  a very important performance 
parameter for aerobic bioprocesses, depends both on the stirrer speed and the airflow, so that this 
dependence is to be quantitatively expressed for using in a control structure, too.

b) Pneumatic reactors
In this type of reactor compressed air is expanded  and  dispersed  through  a  gas distributor 
(sparger). As the density of the air is considerably lower than that of the medium, gas bubbles 
rise up and liquid is entrained with them. The power supplied by the compressed air disperses the 
air and mixes the medium at the same time (Schugerl, 1991)

Bubbles coalescence, which often occurs in such reactors, is not required in aerobic bioprocesses 
as the oxygen transfer is decreased. The energy dissipation rate should be kept as uniform as 
possible throughout the reactor to prevent coalescence. Fermentation media may promote coalescence, 
but at a lower level than pure liquids (water).

The most used pneumatic reactors are:
•  Airlift reactors (Chisti, 1989, Schugerl, 1985, Blenke, 1985);
•  Column reactors (Chisti, 1989);
•  Tower reactors (Chisti, 1989).

In the airlift reactor the driving force for the liquid flow is provided by the density
6
difference between the aerated liquid in the riser zone and the non-aerated liquid in the downcomer 
zone, this in turn being a function of difference in gas hold-up.

From all airlift bioreactors those with internal circulation are the most used. There are also 
bioreactors with external flow (Schugerl, Siltig, 1987), but in these cases the hydrodynamics and 
mass transfer are hard to design and optimize.

The airlift reactors with internal flow have many advantages in comparison with the stirrer 
reactors.  Hence,  they perform  an adequate mixing and a fast mass transfer with less power 
consumption; the reduced level of shear forces by comparison of stirrer reactors is another 
advantage for applying them in case where the danger of damage the cells integrity is great enough. 
Moreover, lower construction investment and more operation robustness characterize the airlift 
reactors. But they are less flexible than the stirrer reactors, so that a specific design for each 
aerobic bioprocess is taken into consideration (Chisti, 1989).

Conforming to literature references (Kossen, 1984), in the aerobic bioindustry, the stirrer 
reactors are used for obtaining 93% from the biotechnological products value and the pneumatic 
reactors stand only for 7 %.

a) Bioreactors for plant and animal cells

There are two main groups of animal cells, those who can grow freely in the culture medium  and  
those  who  grow  only immobilized on micro-carriers; the difference between them in cultivation 
conditions is done by the specific physiology. As a general propriety, valid also for plant cells, 
all these cell types are very much affected by the shear stress and often by the gas bubbles 
presence.

Due to the special cultivation conditions, imposed by the animal and plant cells characteristics, 
the design of bioreactors for productive processes with these cells has




developed as a distinct field (Katinger, Scheirer, 1985).

At the mean time the usual variation domain for the cultivation parameters (stirrer speed, aeration 
flow, temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen concentration) is always more limited than that for the 
microorganisms, condition who demands a more precise parameters control.
For animal cells cultivation another gaseous substrate besides oxygen is needed-the carbon 
dioxide-and consequently there are more problems regarding the interfacial transfer of two gases 
diminished only by the slower dynamics  of  whole  cellular  metabolic reactions.

In accordance with these ideas the main types of bioreactors used for the time being for 
cultivating animal and plant cells are:
•  Stirrer reactors;
•  Pneumatic reactors;
•  Vibromixer reactors;
•  Hollow fiber reactors and other special types.

Stirrer bioreactors (Katinger, Scheirer, 1985, Brunswick, 1982, Cheng, Papontsakis, 1986, Bliew, 
Katinger, 1988, Prokop, Rosenberg, 1989) have a smaller aspect ratio than those for applications 
with microorganisms and use impellers which specific geometry, which produce low shear stress. Thow 
a turbulent flow may not be obtained, the stirrer speed is always reduced.















7




1.3. MEASURING SYSTEM FOR BIOPROCESS PARAMETERS



Bioprocess control needs knowledge about biosystem state and evolution.

There are mainly three points of view, for describing  the  measuring  systems  of bioprocess 
variables:
a) According to the type of measured variable: physical and chemical variables (i.e.  
biochemical/biological  variables) (Aiba et al., 1973, Fiechter et al., 1987);
b) According to the place of determination: in-line, on-line, off-line (Linek et al., 1985);
c) According to the type of determination: direct  and  indirect,  the  indirect determined 
variables are obtained from other medium property measurements by simple data correlation. There 
are also

Table 1. Measuring system classification Measuring systems for physical variables
Temperature Pressure
Power consumption for mechanical stirrer Foam
Gas & liquid flow turbidity (OD) Viscosity
Liquid volume






The  on-line  systems  are  the  most recommended (Sonnleitner, Fiechter, 1992; Schugerl, 1992) as 
the process information

8
estimated (calculated) variables obtained by using currently measured variables in conjunction with 
known equations (e.g. OTR — oxygen transfer rate — is estimated by using the dissolved 02 
concentration in a potential type equation).

The off-line systems correspond to laboratory analyses of the medium samples collected from the 
bioreactor at predetermined time periods.

The in-line systems are set up for those cases when it is not allowed to make measurements inside  
the  reactor.  Moreover,  there  are continuous measuring systems (or with a short sample period) 
which can be integrated in the general control structure (Anders et al., 1992).


Measuring systems for chemical variables
pH redox
Dissolved oxygen Dissolved carbon dioxide Oz/COz in the outflow gas
Carbon source concentration (sugar)
Nitrogen source concentration
ion concentration of Mg², K“, Ca²“, Na“, Fe*“,
SO4 °, PO4' DNA, RNA NAD, NADH ATP, ADP, AMP

can be transferred to the control system in real time.




Usually, the following parameters are used for    Table 1 shows the description of the evaluation  
and comparison  of different    measuring instruments used in the bioprocess measuring systems: 
response time, sensibility,    (cf. Aiba et al., 1973). Table 2 presents the accuracy and stability 
(Polakovic, Mandenius,    Aiba's concept extension of gateway sensors 1994; Leung et al., 1991). 
Meanwhile, for the    — with their utilization into bioprocesses.
on-line systems, the sensors must be sterilized and thus, the measuring structures don't interfere 
with the biosystem.

Table 2. Calculated variables types vs. sensor devices
Sensor device                Calculated variables
pH                         Acid product formation
Dissolved oxygen concentration       OTR (Oxygen Transfer Rate) Oxygen concentration in the outflow 
gas; gas OUR (Oxygen Uptake Rate) flows
Carbon dioxide concentration in the outflow CPR (Carbon dioxide Production Rate) gas; gas flows
OUR; CPR                  Respiratory Quotient (RQ = OUR/CPR) Carbon dioxide concentration and feed 
rate    Cell concentration and yield



1.3.1. Direct measurable variables

1.3.1.1. Direct physical determinations

The success of a fermentation depends upon the existence  of defined and optimal


•  Weight.

1.3.1.1.1. Temperature (Brunswick, 1992)
environmental conditions for biomass and    Temperature determination is important in product 
formation. Different physical and    relation with bioprocess evolution as well as chemical 
parameters require to be kept    other process operations (i.e. sterilization, constant  (or 
conforming  to an optimal    concentration,  and  purification).  The evolution trend) during the 
process, i.e. any    temperature measurement is made through deviation from a specified optimum 
might be    mercury-in-glass  thermometers,  bimetallic corrected by a control system.           
thermometers, pressure bulb thermometers, thermocouples,       metal-resistance

The standard direct physical determinations are showed below:
•  Temperature;
•  Pressure (over pressure);
•  Agitator shaft power and rate of stirring;
•  Foam;
•  Gas and liquid flow;
thermometers or thermistors.
The measurement accuracy is about z 0.25 %

The temperature determination in different fermenter measurement points is useful to determine the 
global thermal balance.


9





1.3.1.1.2.  Pressure  (over  pressure) (Brunswick, 1992)

Pressure measurements may be needed for several reasons, the most important of them is the safety. 
Industrial and laboratory equipment is designed to withstand a specified working pressure plus a 
factor of safety. Also, the measurement of pressure is important in media sterilization. Moreover, 
the pressure will influence the solubility of gases and contribute to the maintenance of sterility, 
when a positive pressure is present.

The standard measuring sensor is the Bourdon tube. When a vessel (or pipe) is to be operated under 
aseptic conditions, a diaphragm gauge can be used.

Alternatively, the pressure could be measured remotely using pressure bellows connected to the core 
of a variable transformer or a piezoelectric transducer.

1.3.1.1.3. Agitator shaft power and rate of stirring (Brunswick, 1992)

A variety of sensors can be used to measure the power consumption of a fermenter. On a large-scale 
vessel a wattmeter attached to the agitator motor will give a fairly good indication of power 
uptake. This measurement technique becomes less accurate as there is a decrease in scale to pilot 
scale and finally, to laboratory fermenters, the main contributing factor being friction in the 
stuffing box. Torsion dynamometers can be used in small- scale applications.

In all bioreactors it is important to monitor the rate of rotation (rpm) of the stirred shaft. The 
tachometer used for this purpose may employ electromagnetic induction, voltage generation, light 
sensing or magnetic force as detection mechanisms. The type of signal will determine the final 
choice of tachometer, which is required for recording and/or process control for regulating the 
motor speed. In most cases (for small laboratory fermenters) the standard 9
practice is to use an a. c. slip motor that is coupled to a thyristor command.

1.3.1.1.4. Foam (Brunswick, 1992)

The formation of foam is a difficulty in many types of bioprocesses, which can create serious 
problems if not controlled. It is a common practice to add an antifoam agent to a fermenter when 
the culture starts foaming above a certain predetermined level. The methods used for foam sensing 
and antifoam additions will depend on process and economic considerations.

A standard foam sensing consists in a probe, which is inserted through the top plate of the 
fermenter. Normally, the probe is a stainless steel rod, which is set at a defined level above the 
broth surface. When the foam rises and touch the probe tip, a current is passed through the circuit 
of the probe (i.e. the foam acts as an electrolyte).

A number of mechanical antifoam devices have been made, including discs, propellers, brushes 
attached to the agitator shaft above the surface of the broth. Hence, the foam is broken down when 
it is thrown against the walls of the bioreactor.

Unfortunately, most of the mechanical devices have to be used in conjunction with an antifoam 
agent.

1.3.1.1.5. Flow measurement (for gases and liquids) (Brunswick, 1992)

One of the simplest methods for measuring gas flow introduced into a fermenter is by means of a 
variable aria meter, i.e. rotameter, which consists of a vertically mounted gas tube with an 
increasing bore and enclosing a free- moving float. The position of the float is indicative of the 
flow rate. The accuracy depends on having the gas at a constant pressure, but errors of up to + 10% 
of full- scale deflection are quoted. The errors are greatest at low flow rates.






Ideally, rotameters should not be sterilized and are therefore normally placed between a gas inlet 
and a sterile filter.

The use of oxygen and carbon dioxide gas analyzers for effluent gas analysis requires the provision 
of a very accurate gas-flow measurement if the analyzers are to be used effectively. These 
instruments have a + 1% full scale accuracy and work on the principle of measuring a temperature 
difference across a heating device placed in the path of the gas flow.

The measurements of flow rates of sterile liquids present a number of problems, which have to be 
overcome. On a laboratory scale flow rates may be measured manually using a sterile burette 
connected to the feed pipe and timing the exit of a measured volume. The use of rotameters is also 
available.

In batch and fed-batch culture fermenters a cheaper alternative is to measure flow rates indirectly 
by load cells (see below, the weight section). The fermenter is attached to load cells, which 
monitor the increases, and decreases in weight of the vessel at regular time intervals. Provided 
the specific gravities of the liquids are known it is possible to estimate flow rates in different 
feed pipes.

1.3.1.1.6. Weight (Brunswick, 1992)

A load cell offers a convenient method of finding the weight of an object.

A load cell is essentially an elastic body, usually a solid or tubular steel cylinder, its 
compressive strain under axial load being measured. The cell is calibrated by measuring compressive 
strain over the appropriate range of loading. A convenient method of measuring the strain is by 
means of electrical resistance strain gauges that are cemented to the surface of the cylinder. The 
changes of resistance with strain  are  proportional  to load  and  are
determined  by  appropriate  electrical apparatus.

It is therefore possible to monitor feed rates from medium reservoirs, acid and bases utilization 
for pH control and the use of antifoam agent for foam control: the changes in weight in a known 
time interval can be used as a measure of liquid flow rates.

1.3.1.2. Direct chemical determinations

The regular chemical determinations are presented below:
•  pH;
•  Redox potential;
•  Dissolved oxygen concentration (pO2);
•  Dissolved carbon dioxide concentration;
•  Exit-gas analysis;
•  On-line analysis of other chemical factors (ion-specific sensors, enzyme electrodes, microbial 
electrodes, mass spectrometers, fluorimeters).

1.3.1.2.1. pH (Brunswick, 1992)

In batch culture, the pH of an actively growing culture will not remain constant for very long. 
Hence, in most processes there is a need for pH measurement and control during the fermentation if 
maximum yield of a product is to be obtained. The pH may be further controlled by the addition of 
appropriate quantities of ammonia or sodium hydroxide if too acid, or sulfuric acid if the change 
is to an alkaline condition. Normally, the pH drift is only in one direction.

pH measurement is carried out using a combined glass reference electrode that will withstand 
repeated sterilization at temperature of 120°C and pressures of l38kN/m². The electrode is 
connected via leads to a pH-meter.

1.3.1.2.2. Redox potential (rH) (Brunswick, 1992)


10





The redox potential is a measure of the oxidation-reduction potential of a biological system and 
can be determined as a voltage, the value in any system depending on the equilibrium of:

Reduced form  Oxidized form + electron(s) The measuring electrode consists of gold, platinum or 
iridium probe, which is welded to
a copper lead. The interpretation of results
presents difficulties since the microorganisms can be at different redox potential by comparison 
with the broth.

1.3.1.2.3. Dissolved oxygen concentration (pO2)(Brunswick, 1992)
In most aerobic fermentations it is essential that the dissolved oxygen concentration does not fall 
below a specified minimal level.

In small fermenters (1 dm3) the most used electrodes are galvanic and have a lead anode, silver  
cathode  and  employ  potassium hydroxide, chloride, bicarbonate or acetate as electrolyte. These 
electrodes are suitable for monitoring very slow changes in oxygen concentrations, but they are 
very sensitive to temperature  fluctuations.  Moreover,  the electrodes have a limited life because 
of corrosion of the anode.

Polarographic electrodes are more commonly used in pilot or production bioreactors. For an increase 
of precision, they are both pressure and temperature compensated.

1.3.1.2.4.  Dissolved  carbon  dioxide concentration (Brunswick, 1992)
The measurement of dissolved carbon dioxide concentration is possible with an electrode, since a pH 
or voltage change can be detected because of the gas going into solution. The first available 
electrode consisted of a combined pH electrode with a bicarbonate buffer surrounding the bulb and 
ceramic plug. Unfortunately, this electrode was not steam sterilizable. A new version (which can be
11
steam sterilized) involves a thin layer of aqueous bicarbonate over the glass sensing membrane of 
the pH electrode.

1.3.1.2.5. Exit-gas analysis (Brunswick, 1992)

The measurement and recording of the effluent gas composition is important in many fermentation 
studies. By observing the concentrations of carbon dioxide and oxygen in the entry and exit gases 
in the bioreactor, and knowing the gas flow rate it is possible to determine the oxygen uptake rate 
of the system, the carbon dioxide evolution rate, and the respiration rate of the microbial 
culture.

A paramagnetic gas analyzer can determine the oxygen concentration, taking into account the strong 
affinity of the oxygen for a magnetic field.

Carbon dioxide is commonly monitored by infrared analysis using a positive filtering method.

Generally, it is expensive to have separate carbon dioxide and oxygen analyzers for each fermenter. 
Therefore, it may be possible to couple up a group of fermenters via a multiplexer to a single pair 
of gas analyzers.





1.3.1.2.6. On-line analysis of other chemical factors (Brunswick, 1992)

Ion-specific sensors
Ion-specific sensors have been developed to measure NH3“, Ca²“, K+, Mg² , PO4’ , etc. However, none 
of these probes are steam sterilizable.

Enzyme electrodes
Enzyme electrodes may also be used in some analyses. Hence, a suitable enzyme, which produces a 
change in pH or determines oxygen formation in the enzyme reaction, is chosen. This enzyme is 
immobilized on a membrane held in close contact to a pH or oxygen electrode.

Microbial electrodes
Microbial electrodes using immobilized whole cells have been developed and used for determination 
of assimilable sugars, acetic

1.3.2. Indirectly measurable variables

The indirect measurements allow variable values estimation at each sample period, f. Usually, the 
corresponding errors exceed the errors resulted from direct measurements (i.e. the statistical 
error between the direct/indirect method till to 40%) (Montague et al., 1988).

Commonly, the bioprocess dynamics can be depicted by the equation (Staniskis, Simutis, 1988):
dx —— f(x(t),u(t), p,(I),/) + v(/)   1.3.2.1
dt
and the measure:
z(t) —— h(x(t),u(t), p₂(t),t)+ w(I)   1.3.2.2
where: xT = (xc ..,XL)= state variables vector (biomass  concentration  X,  substrate
acid, ethyl alcohol, vitamin B, nicotinic acid, glutamic acid and cephalosporins.

Mass spectrometers
The mass spectrometer can be used for on-line analysis since it is very versatile and has a 
response time less than 10 seconds for full- scale response, but is unfortunately expensive. It 
does allow for monitoring of gas partial pressures (Oz, COz, CH4, etc.) dissolved gases (Oz, COz, 
CH4, etc.) concentrations and volatiles (methanol, ethanol, acetone, etc.).

Fluorimeters
It is well established that fluorimetric measurements are very specific and rapid but their use in 
bioprocess studies is quasi-limited for the time being. Hence, the measurement of NAD (provided it 
remains at a constant concentration in cells) would be an ideal method for continuous measurement 
of microbial biomass concentration.



concentration S, product concentration P, etc.);
uT = (u ,.....,uk) = control variables vector (dilution rate D, pH, temperature T, etc.);
Pi(t), Pz(t)  bioprocess model vector and measuring system vector;
f, h = process model vector and measure model vector (non-linear operators) dim f= L; dim h = p;
v, w = noise;
z = measure vector.

The indirect measurements are generally performed by the application of discrete methods. Hence, if 
it is supposed (Montague et al., 1988) that the direct measurement of process variables is done at 
each moment K and the indirect measurement performed at each moment k, from (1.3.2.1), (1.3.2.2) it 
is obtained:

12




x(k + l) = &(x(K),u(K), p,(K),K,Af) + w(K)
2             2               h,(x(K),u(K), p₂(K), K)


Z(K) ——

L       +  L
h (x(K),u(K), p₂(K), K)   •‹u
Z(K) ——
+
hp   (K),u(K), p₂(K) K)   p
1.3.2.4


hp  (K),u(K), p (K)z K)   p
1.3.2.3

where: t = m*at, m*2at, the information is obtained both from direct and indirect measurements;
m = AT/At and m At < t < m 2at.

Moreover:
The measurement algorithm for discrete
filtration can take the estimation of x(K), if the equation (1.3.2.3), (1.3.2.4) can be determined. 
Commonly, this item is not reached due to the following factors:
•  There is always a time dependent evolution of the bioprocesses (i.e. the parameter vectors 
change theirs values during the process behavior;
•  The equations (1.3.2.3), (1.3.2.4 don't describe all process phenomena, but they are only a 
simplified representation.

Hence, for measuring noises rejection, an adaptive measuring system can be taken into 
consideration, cf. the following picture:










Zd(K)






Zd(K)    p2(K)




Fig. 1.3.2.1 General adaptive structure for bioprocess measurements (cf. Stanskis, Simutis, 1988)


13





In this case it would be considered that the direct measuring errors are approximated by a gaussian 
white noise E(V} = 0 and the dispersion is G² , = (Kv, z,) . In this case, K-I is a coefficient 
which characterizes the medium  errors  of  measurements.  The experiments have already 
demonstrated that the Kvj value is contained in the domain 0.001. 0.5 and depends on measuring 
method
and state variable. Commonly, the following parameters can be measured: oxygen uptake rate (ro2), 
pH rate evolution (ra)› carbon dioxide production rate (rcoz), heat production rate (rQ). Different 
kinetic equations link these parameters using the process state variables.

Hence, a continuous bioprocess can be described by the following equation set:
dx dt
dS —— D(So —  + p(I, S, P,u' , p„t)X + Y2(i)
dP —— D(Po — P) + s(X,S,P,u' , p„t)X + Y3(i)
1.3.2.5
where: Xo. S0.  0. X, S, P = biomass concentration, limiting substrate concentration and product 
concentration (input/output);
q, 3, c = specific growth rate, specific consumption  rate and specific  product formation rate;
u' = [T,  pH,  pO2 ...QT = the
environmental process vector;
Pi = model parameter vector; D = dilution rate;
1(t), W (t),  3(t) = modeling noises.
Therefore, the indirect measurement system is described by the following equation set (where vi 
...v4 are modeling noises):

₀ z ") '  K  X,S,P,u' , p„/)J(I) + A₂J(I)+ K e(X,S,P,u' , p,,f)J(/) + v,(I)
rco,( )'  K₄$q(X,S,P,u' , pt,t)K( )+ As ( ) + K₆ (X, S,P,u' , p,,t)^ !)+ • (')


1.3.2.6

A Kalman procedure is imposed in these    The one-leve1 prediction Kalman algorithm is 
circumstances (i.e. on-line variable estimation    depicted below:
based on 1.3.2.3 process model):


X(K + l) = X(K + I K)(K + l) •
• (Z(K + 1) —
— h(X(K + I K)y (K + 1)2 Hz UK)y K + 1))
1.3.2.7


Moreover,  the algorithm  for a priori computation of covariance errors matrix (CEM) is:



    X(K),u'   
P,(K + 1 I K) —— S
K), K, kT]
- P,(K-)
  [X(K),u(K),  K), K, kT]+
(K)

Q(K)

1.3.2.9


14





and the one for CEM estimation:

P,(K + 1) = P,(K + 1 / K) — P,(K + 1 / K)

d h T[X(K + 1 / K)y (K + 1)9 Hz UK)9 K + l]
d X(K + 1 / K)
[# h[X(K + l / K),u(K + 1), p2 (K),K + i] P,(K + l / K)
# I(A + 1 / K)

d h T[X(K + l / K), u(K + 1), p (A), A + i]
1.3.2.10
                 ²       + S(K + l)]
d X(K + l / K)
d h[X(K + 1 / K),u(K + 1), p2 (A), A + i] P,(K + 1 / A)
d X(K + l / K)


Furthermore:
dhT[X(K + 1 K) u(K + I)•P2  ) K + 1]  i


1.3.2.11

(x + i) -
dX(K + I I K)
- s (›r + i)


where: Sa  the ageing factor;
S(K), Q(K)  = the corresponding matrices of measuring noise covariance and modeling noise 
covariance.

The initial conditions X(0) and  x(0) are the best (initial) estimations of the state variable 
vector and the uncertainty degree of X(0) selection, respectively. The parameters pt and P2 are 
time dependent. Hence, the state
variables can be estimated. A commonly used
procedure is the Least Squares Method. So, the equation 1.2.3.4 is developed in Taylor series:

X,(K + L)  &,(p,(K)) + W(K)
}(  )'  hf(Pz  )) + V(K)
1.3.2.12
and the estimation of Pi(K) is obtained with recursive LSM:

p,(A) —— p,(A — 1) +
+ K(  A — l) —  A)fi A — 1))
K(A) —— P(K — 1)G (A)J (K)P(K — 1)G (K) +
1
2
0
P(K) —— SQ(I — K(A)G,(A)P(A — l))
1.3.2.13
A similar algorithm can be used for P2 estimation. Consequently,  t(0) and P2(0) can be  determined 
 following  the  off-line identification,  and  P(0)  will  define  the preliminary error 
identification of Pi(0) and P2(0). A second method makes possible the simultaneous estimation of 
process state and model parameters. Hence, we suppose that Pi(K) and P2(K) are fixed within a 
sample period; the variable state vector will be:

X(K + l)   &[X(K),u(K),K,kT]   W(K)
X,(K + 1) =  p,(K + 1) =      p,(K)     +  p  K)
p₂(K +1)       p₂(fi)       p  K)

and the algorithm (1.3.2.7) = (1.3.2.11) can be applied in this case, too.

15

1.3.2.14




CONCLUSIONS
1. General bioprocess presentation make evident the living systems specificity, i.e. non-linearity, 
multi-variability and powerful interdependence between process variables. In these conditions, 
different cultivation procedures impose specific control optimizations being able to optimize the 
ensemble bioprocess — bioreactor.
2. The instrumentation development for the measuring of bioprocess variables is a basic condition 
for future control strategy development. The actual limitations of measuring systems are:
•  The performant measuring instruments are generally too expensive and are not included in the 
standard bioreactor equipment.
•  Generally, only the environmental cell medium is monitored and so, the intermediate level for 
metabolic reaction rates is not known.
•  The enzymatic activity determination is accomplished off-line.

Consequently, the bioprocess control structure will progress depending on measuring systems 
development. The control based on analytical (a priori) model is limited due to the scarcity of the 
corresponding measuring systems, able to supervise the intracellular phenomena and to monitor the 
interactions between bioprocess variables. To surpass these difficulties the implementation of 
intelligent techniques represents a more applicable solution, even if only the advanced phenomena 
cognition can establish the right solution for the optimal bioprocess control.
























16
