In this chapter will be configured the general intelligent structure for bioprocess control. Hence, 
in # 3.1 will be shown divers original models ofdifferent considered bioprocesses and the 
corresponding modeling results. The model heterogeneity is due to the microorganism types 
variability. Following the model types, in # 3.2 will be established the general control criteria, 
by tackling the general bioprocess control theory in addition with the conceptual modalities to 
deal with the model fiuctuation. Finally, in # 3.3 will be configured the general intelligent 
control structure based on working hypothesis, i.e. bioprocess pattern recognition, analytical 
optimization and fuzzy control. The process database will be configured on AS400 system.
|
The experimental data analysis guides to the impossibility to develop global models, which can 
formalize  ( from mathematical point of view )  all the culture phases. Hence, distinct limited models 
have been developed, who are applicable through specific evolution conditions. The control 
algorithm practice with a priori model is limited from this point of view. Moreover, the adaptive 
control systems offer a sub optimal global solution  ( despite the optimization during the time 
samples ) .

Therefore, the intelligent control techniques offer the possibilities to substitute the bioprocess 
information lack  (  and the general evolution rules  )  for the subjective principles established by a 
human expert. So, an intelligent control system can be built in order to manage specific bioprocess 
types.
|
3.1.1. Mathematical modeling of enzymatic hydrolysis of wheat straw under the inhibitory effect of 
the end product

Cellulose is the most abundant organic compound in the world and is constantly replenished  by  
photosynthesis.  The conversion of cellulose to soluble sugars is accomplished by cellulolytic 
enzymes or mineral  acids,  both  methods  being characterized   by   advantages   and 
disadvantages  (  Marsden, Gray, 1986  ) .

The enzymatic hydrolysis is a process performed in heterogeneous system, involving the action of 
soluble enzyme  (  cellulase  )  on insoluble substrate. Cellulase is not a single enzyme but is, 
depending on the source, a multicomponent  entity  with  variable composition. In general, 
cellulases secreted by fungi consist of three major classes of components:  endoglucanases,  
cellobio  hydrolases  and  beta glucosidases.  The conversion of cellulose to glucose occurred by 
the  synergism  between  the  individual components of the cellulase system. Despite the great 
number of the studies concerning the mode of cellulase action  (  Estebauer et al  1991, Kuhard et 
al  1993, Steiner, 1994,
Maheswari, 1993, Olama, 1993  ) , the results provide only an approximate representation of the enzyme 
hydrolysis kinetics of an insoluble cellulose.
|
The kinetics of the enzymatic hydrolysis of insoluble cellulose primary depends on three groups of 
factors  ( David et al  1986, Morisson, 1988, Ramos et al  Ropars et al  1992, Zacchi et al, 
1988  )  : the structural features of cellulose, the nature of the enzyme system employed and the mode 
of interaction between cellulose and enzyme. Furthermore, kinetic characteristics of the 
heterogeneous cellulose cellulase system, such as mass transfer adsorption and desorption of the 
enzyme,  surface  reaction  and  product inhibition should be examined. A kinetic model, which 
considers all these factors, has not been proposed.
|
Experimental conditions
   Enzyme. cellulase system was obtained from the culture of the cellulolytic fungus Aspergillus 
niger  ( Archer, 1994, Orsson, 1993, Szewczyk, 1994 ; Mandels, 1969 ) . The culture broth was filtered 
through nylon cloth and filtrate was used as enzyme preparate ;
   Substrate. milled and alkaline treated wheat straw  ( NaOH at 120 C, one hour )  ;  ( Jecu, 1996 )  ;
   Enzymatic hydrolysis. enzyme digestion of substrate was carried out at 45 C in acetate buffer, 
pH 4.5, to which sodium azide has been added to prevent microbial contamination. The reaction  
mixture contained various amount of substrate  ( 12 ; 20 ; 40 ; and 60 g/l ) . The influence of the
|
The experimental data have shown the inhibitory effect of the accumulation of end product in the 
mixture reaction. The yield of substrate conversion has decreased greatly with the increase of the 
glucose concentration.

In the limited conditions  ( Caramihai and Jecu, 1995 ) , for a function P=f ( inhibitor ) , taking into 
account a finite inhibitor concentration  ( I=Ilim )  the product accumulation being 0, the inhibitory 
effects were produced only by the substrate concentration. For this case, the proposed model has 
the following equation:
substrate concentrations, presents a linear dependence between the product formation and substrate 
concentration 
|
In enzyme reaction, the accumulated end products usually inhibit the rate of the process. In this 
case, glucose was competing with the substrate cellulose for the active sites on the enzyme. The 
supplementation of the mixture reaction with different amounts of glucose determined important 
decreases of the product concentration  ( Annex 1, Table 1 ) .
As shown from the figures 3.1.1.1, 3.1.1.2 and
3.1.1.3 the most significant decrease of the product release was obtained in the presence of 20 g/L 
exogene glucose.
|
In a discontinuous aerobic bioprocess a high producing   bacterium   Micrococcus lysodeikticus  
accumulates  intracellular catalase for the H2Oz decomposing. The toxic H2O2 formation is due to 
cellular respiration, and consequently a high catalase activity is characteristic for the 
exponential growth phase.
|
Following   #2.1.1.3  and  Gaden's recommendation, the product accumulation is to be considered 
conforming to the metabolic route of product formation and related to the culture growth:
  Product formation kinetic is a function of substrate consumption rate, ipso facto of the growth 
rate  ( growth associated product accumulation )  ; the total change in free enthalpy is negative  
type I. The main product appears as a result of primary energy metabolism by oxidation of the 
substrate.  Growth  curve,  substrate consumption and product formation are very similar.
  Product  formation  kinetic  is  only indirectly dependent on the substrate

 The controlled parameters were speed, temperature, airflow and pressure.
consumption, the relationship with the growth curve being complex ; the total change in free 
enthalpy is also negative
 Product formation kinetic does not depend on the substrate consumption and the change in free 
enthalpy is positive
|
Taking into account of these criteria, a type I product formation kinetic is a logical answer for 
the intracellular catalase accumulation.

Experimental conditions

The Micrococcus lysodeikticus bacterium was cultivated in a stirred tank lab bioreactor  with 10L  
medium.  The  main  aerobic  batch bioprocess parameters were:
   Temperature: 30  C
   Pressure: 0.5 atm
   Stirrer speed: 450   550 rpm
   pH 9, unnecessary control
   Air fiow: 400   800 L/h
   Time process: 20 24h

The bioprocess parameters were monitored and controlled by conventional procedures.
Medium  composition:  NaHCO3  1,7%, CaHPO40,2 %, yeast extract 2%, molasses 1%/r.s  microelements.
|
During the exponential growth phase, the C substrate  is mainly used for metabolites accumulation, 
principal product formation and growth energy obtaining ; on the other hand in the stationary phase 
the share for growth metabolites and energy obtaining is much decreasing to the benefit of the 
substrate used for maintaining energy and product formation.
|
The model described by the equation  ( 3.1.2.3 ) , a growth associated product accumulation model,  
predicted  well  enough  the experimental behavior. The proposed model is not only an extension of 
the classical model, but expresses better the more complex dependence between growth and product 
formation, and finally the existing metabolic routes. Furthermore, the modeling error is better 
that the classic model errors  ( see Table 2, Annex 2 ) .
|
3.1.3.  Modeling  of  alcoholoxydase production with Hansenula polymorpha
Experimental conditions
A fed batch bioprocess for alcoholoxydase obtaining with the methylotrophic yeast Hansenula  
polymorpha  CBS 4732  was operated in an airlift lab bioreactor  ( draft concentric airlift with air 
sparged riser ) . The enzyme is used for obtaining a high  specialized  kit  for  methanol/ethanol 
determination.

The yeast was cultivated on a complex medium containing  ( NH4 ) 2SO4   2 04  N 2HPO4 MgSO4 7H O, 
CaC12.yeast extract or autolysed residual beer yeast as organic N source and microelements  ( Fe, B, 
Cu, I, Mn, Zn, Mo ) .

The main process parameters were:
  continuous temperature control 37 38 C ;
  a minimal level of pOz   10 % from the saturation concentration was maintained during the 
exponential growth ;
  continuous pH control between 4.5 5.0 by addition of NH4OH ;
  no foam control, if the main parameters are optimally controlled ;
   pH: 4.5 5
|
The unique C source, the methanol was introduced function of the yeast growth rate in connection 
with the substrate consumption rate for avoiding the growth inhibition by substrate concentration.

The previous studies  ( Chirvase and Marica, 1992 )  for airlift performance characterization and 
bioprocess optimization demonstrated that on  these  conditions  a  high  level  of alcoholoxydase 
was accumulated during the first part of the exponential phase growth. So that the assumption of a 
growth associated product formation model becomes plausible.

Conforming to the studies presented in the experimental part a growth associated product
accumulation model  ( type I )  is to be considered  ( Caramihai et al, 1995 ) 
|
Meanwhile the parameter Xp represents a threshold value, which defines the present model behavior 
in comparison with the classical Gaden model:
  if Xp = X, model  ( 3.1.3.1 )  corresponds to Gaden model ;
  if Xp   X, product rate is grater than product rate obtained by Gaden model ;
  if Xp   X, product rate is lesser than Gaden product rate.
|
The alcoholoxydase  is  an  intracellular enzyme, so there is a complex procedure for its obtaining 
after its biosynthesis  ( cells disruption, extraction with adequate solutions, extract 
concentration, etc. ) . The product rate evolution can be expressed in a first form as the activity 
of the enzyme determined by a known biochemical analysis in the volume of extract  ( mL )  obtained 
after cells disruption and extraction.

|
Fig. 3.1.3.1, 3.1.3.2, 3.1.3.3 represent the product accumulation rate evolution  ( model curves )  by 
comparison with the experimental data for representative fed   batch runs.

Finally, we can see that the chosen model predicted  well  enough  the  experimental behavior  and  
can  be  considered  as  a contribution  to the product  accumulation modeling for the special 
case, when the bioprocess  product  is  an  enzyme. Furthermore, in the three experiments, two 
levels of alcoholoxydase activity can be reached depending on two cellular metabolism systems for 
enzyme using as catalyst and probably  independent  of  the  cultivation conditions. The idea of 
two different systems for the enzyme using in the cellular growth is sustained by the good fitting 
of the same model, but with two levels for the kmvalue  ( ki in experiment 3   kt in experiment 1 
and 2 ) .
|
3.1.4.  Mathematical  modeling  of  the enzymatic hydrolysis of wheat straw

Recent interest in renewable resource has prompted many researchers to investigate the enzymatic 
hydrolysis of cellulose. Despite the efforts of these investigators, much of the mechanism for 
cellulose hydrolysis is still unclear. The complexity of the problem is, in a large part, due to 
the significant alteration of
|
The yield of the enzymatic hydrolysis process is dependent in a large measure of the substrate 
level. It has been stated that the substrate concentration increase over an optimal value produces 
the decrease of the rate digestion.

According to our results, we have proposed a mathematical  model for describing the enzymatic 
hydrolysis of pretreated wheat straw using a fungal cellulase complex.
|
As shown, the modeling error for the untreated substrate is higher as compared with the 
corresponding value for the treated straw, as a consequence of the off line measurements and 
structural  modification  of  the pretreated substrate.

The agreement between real and modeling data is good enough to allow the 
obtainment of the optimal substrate concentration for the enzymatic process control.
|
Experimental conditions
   Substrate.  alkaline pre treated wheat straw ;
   Enzyme. enzymic preparate obtained from
Aspergillus niger cultures ;
   Enzymatic hydrolysis. the experiments were performed at 50  C with 10   120 g/L substrate 
concentrations, in order to avoid the inhibition with substrate excess  ( cf.
#3.1.4. ) . To study the effect of glucose accumulation in the reaction mixture
3.1.5. Modeling of the enzymatic hydrolysis in the conditions of product inhibition
|
In enzyme reactions, the accumulated end products inhibit the rate of the process. Many authors 
reported that glucose inhibited the hydrolysis of cellulose by filtrates of the majority of the 
cellulolytic organisms  ( Wood, 1992 ; Robson et al  1989 ) . The degree of inhibition depends on the 
relative affinities of the inhibitor and substrate for the active sites and on the ratio of the 
concentration of the inhibitor and substrate.
|
In  order  to  obtain  cellulose,  chemical treatment has been considered a viable option for 
upgrading the huge quantities of waste lignocellulose generated annually through the activities  of 
 the  agricultural  and  forest industries   ( Wenzl,  1970 ) .  During  the treatment,  acetic  acid  
contained  in  the
Due to assess the influence of acetic acid on the growth of this organism, a study was conducted 
using a synthetic medium, by simulating the real condition.

Experimental conditions
   Growth medium: 20 g/L glucose or 10 g/L xylose ; 4 g/L yeast extract, 5 g/L peptone ; inhibitory 
compound, acetic acid  ( 1/100, w/v ) .
   Organism. Candida utilis
   Agitation: 180 rpm ;
   Temperature: 35 C ;
   Process time. 10 h ;
   Analytical    methods.    biomass concentration was evaluated by optical density  ( DO )  ; dry 
weight was estimated according to Jeffries and Streenath  ( 1988 ) , where 1 DO=0.19 g/L dry weight. 
The content of acetic acid was estimated with Perkin   Elmer    ( Model   B )    gas chromatograph.
|
At the end of fermentation,  inhibitor concentrations for both experiments were the same. The above 
equations were checked with the experimental data presented in the Table 1. Fig. 3.1.6.1 and 
3.1.6.2 show the inhibitor concentration vs. time for the both substrate types.
|
Fig. 3.1.6.4 Specific growth rate vs. substrate and inhibitor concentration  ( substrate: xylose )  ;   
real data,  model
The models described by eq. 3.1.6.1 and
3.1.6.2  predicted  well  enough  the experimental behavior, demonstrating the working hypothesis 
are valid. A powerful dependence between specific growth rate and inhibitor's evolution is 
sustained together with the presence of two parameters: S and I.

The bioprocess modeling take into account the inhibitor effect of methanol  ( Caramihai et al, 1992 )   
on  the  bacteria  growth.  The experimental data are shown in Annex 7, Table 1 12. The dependence 
q = f ( S )   ( Annex 7, Table 13 )  is presented in Fig. 3.1.7.1. Note that in this case, the specific 
growth rate is zero for a finite substrate value.
|
Therefore, a valid hypothesis can be the presence of a Metabolic Reducing Factor, R ( S )  attached to 
the classical Haldane  ( Andrews )  model. The metabolic reducing factor is zero when the substrate 
concentration achieved a limiting value, S = Slim  Meanwhile, R ( S )  tills to 1 for lower substrate 
concentration values. Hence, the proposed model is:

  k,S    R ( S ) 
|
Since yeasts are characterized  by low conversion yield of methanol and reduced protein level, it 
is of interest to study the Single Cell Protein  ( SCP )  obtaining frommethylotrophic bacteria. In this circumstance:
   The conversion yield is higher than in the yeast case ;
   The protein content is higher  ( 75 80 % ref. dry weight, compared to 45 50% for yeast ) .
|
3.1.8. Modeling of a fungal cellulase process

Microorganisms growing on lignocellulosic substrates are able to produce extracellular enzymes, 
which degrade cellulose to soluble sugars. These sugars, mainly cellobiose and glucose, represent 
available carbon source for the secretion of extracellular  enzymes, cellulases.  Cellulose  
fermentation  thus represents a very interesting example of a fermentation  where  growth,  enzyme 
production and enzyme reaction are closely interdependent.

Cellulase is a multicomponent enzymatic system, which comprises three main enzymes: endoglucanases, 
     exoglucanases  ( cellobiohydrolases )  and beta glucosidases. The individual enzymes act 
synergistic for the complete degradation of insoluble cellulose. The most important cellulolytic 
fungus is Trichoderma reesei, but it is of interest to study other organisms, like Aspergillus sp  
which is able to produce a wide range of extracellular enzymes growing on various substrates.
|
Experimental conditions
   Organism. Aspergillus niger strain which belongs  to  microbial  collection  of Research 
Institute for Chemistry ;
   Culture media. the strain was cultivated on Mandels's medium  ( 1969 )  with 1 % cellulose as sole 
carbon source. The fungal cultures were performed at 4.5 pH and 28 C. The culture broth was 
centrifuged at 3000 rpm and the supernatant was evaluated for cellulase activity ;
   Analytical methods: the enzymatic activity was measured as endoglucanase activity using   1 %   
carboxymethylcellulose, according to Mandels  ( 1976 ) . One unit of enzyme activity was expressed as 
the amount of glucose  ( micromoles )  released per minute under the assay conditions. The reducing  
sugars  were  evaluated  with dinitrosalicylic reagent according to Miller  ( 1959 ) . Soluble protein 
was determined by the  Lowry  method   ( 1951 ) .  Mycelial protein was extracted with NaOH, the 
protein was determined on the combined extracts. Cellulose was determined as total carbohydrate  in 
the residue from the NaOH extraction by the sulfuric acid method. Cell mass was calculated as dry 
weight minus cellulose.
   Time process: 120 h.
|
The experimental results of the fungal cultivation are given in Annex 8, Table 1. The relationship 
between mycelial protein and enzyme production is shown in figure 3.1.8.1. This indicates an 
increase in the production of enzyme   with   increasing   growth microorganism, evaluated as 
mycelial protein.
Hence, fig. 3.1.8.3 shows the dependence of cellulase  production  vs.  cell  mass  and cellulose 
utilization in the batch fermentation of cellulolytic fungus Aspergillus niger.
|
The response of substrate concentration at the growth and enzyme production is seen in Figure 
3.1.8.2. After 120 h of fermentation, the level of residual substrate indicates a carbon source 
consumption of approx. 30% for maximum cellulase production. The profile indicates a good fitting 
between the real and modeling data.
|
The bioprocess modeling and  ( intelligent )  control imposes the design of a system that can 
distinguish and develop the corresponding operations in order to control the process  ( Montague et 
al  1991 ) . It has already proved  ( in the above chapters )  the multivariability and the nonlinearity 
of the fermentation processes. In this case, the bioprocess control, based on a priori model, is 
very difficult due to the scarcity of the on line process information and of  the deficit  
concerning  the theoretical substantiation  regarding   the  cellular metabolism and its influence 
on the bioprocess behavior.
|
In these conditions it is necessary to replace the classical control methods with those based on 
intelligent  techniques. The thorough utilization of one of them guides to a deadlock, either 
because of the bio physique chemica1 knowledge deficiency regarding the cell population evolution 
 ( i.e. the classical control techniques ) , or the exhaustive utilization of the human  expert  
knowledge,  which  are subjective  and  non standard   ( i.e.  the intelligent control structure )    
 ( Thibault, Najim, 1993 ) .
|
Hence, it is necessary to design a control system, which can to choose the  ( intelligent )  control 
strategies, based on analytical models, in order to improve the control performances. This is an 
Intelligent Control Structure  ( ICS )  based on Hybrid Control Techniques  ( HCT ) .
|
Commonly, a bioprocess control structure departs from its specificity  ( Chang e/ al  1988 ; Lim et 
al  1986, Semones, Lim, 1989 ) ,
i.e. the control system is designed for each process  type. The bioprocess  diversity imposes a 
corresponding variety of control algorithms.
|
Consequently, a control structure restriction type can be established through bioprocess
16
classes  substantiation   ( e.g.  cell  growth, enzymatic hydrolysis, product obtaining, etc. ) . Each 
bioprocess class agrees with a finite number of control algorithms. The intelligent control 
structure must establish the bioprocess type  ( from a corresponding class ) , based on a priori 
information outfitted by the human operator.

Once the bioprocess type established, ICS checks the corresponding model. The main advantage of a 
priori model is the possibility to  ( analytically )  set the global optimum, independently from the 
subjective human expert information.
|
The human bioprocess general description is commonly altered by the psychological and perception 
factors. It has already founded  ( Garrido Sanchez et a/, 1993 )  that the intelligent control systems 
founded  ( only )  on the human subjective knowledge is less performant that the control systems who 
utilize the objective information fitted by a conceptual model. Hence, the literature recommends 
 ( Fonteix et al  1994 )  the intelligent control techniques utilization only if the control 
structures based on quantitative models fail.
|
Therefore,  the  utilization  of  conceptual models in conjunction with intelligent control 
techniques appear to be attractive  ( Chtourou et al  1993 ; Normandin et al  1994 ; Willis et al  
1992 ) . Through the analytical  model the optimum coordinates  are determined ;  the modalities to 
reach these coordinates are founded by the intelligent structure  ( Thibault, van Breusegem, 1991 ) . 
Hence, the subjective conditions  ( resulted from the human expert )  needed to attain the optimality 
are juxtaposed with the objective elements  ( outcome from the mathematical formalism )  which display 
the optimum  coordinates.  Obviously,  the biosystems  are  multivariable.  A  process
optimum in connection with a variable  ( or a variables set )  is not obligatory the global optimum of 
the bioprocess  ( in relation with all the variables )     ( Luttman et al  1985 ; Lee et al  1991 ; 
Modak et al  1986 )  ) . The choice is tacked  based  on human knowledge  and experience  in  
connection  with  the  final objective, related to a specific fermentation process.
|
CONCLUSIONS

1. The bioprocess evolution analysis has allowed to define models who fit better the process 
evolution curves. Specific bioprocess classes have been described and some original models have 
been developed in order to increase the fitting of real data. The estimation errors were better in 
all cases  ( see Annexes )  than the well known corresponding literature model errors.
2. The model diversity can be  ( conceptually )  treated through an unique control structure based on 
analytical model and intelligent techniques. Hence, an intelligent control structure was designed, 
which is able to detect the bioprocess type, to design the process model and to control the 
fermentation process based on intelligent techniques, in order to maximize a performance index.
3. The corresponding database was configured through the AS400 system, due to its well known 
advantages  ( security and integrity of data ) . The database access allows the data monitoring and, on 
the other hand, the establishing of the bioprocess evolution patterns.